[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> "Thinking Allowed."
Conversations on the leading
edge of knowledge and discovery
with psychologist
Jeffrey Mishlove.
>> Hello and welcome.
I'm Jeffrey Mishlove.
Today we are going to explore
psychic and spiritual healing
from a scientific perspective.
My guest, Dr.
Elizabeth Targ, is one
of America's
foremost researchers
in the area of psychic
and spiritual healing.
She is the Director
of the Institute--
the Center for Complementary
Medical Research--
the Complementary Medical
Research Institute-- there it
is-- at the California
Pacific Medical Center.
She is a member of the faculty
of the University of California
San Francisco School of Medicine
Department of psychiatry.
Welcome, Elizabeth.
>> Thank you very much.
>> It's a pleasure
to be with you.
You are an unusual
person for a psychiatrist
and a medical doctor
to be exploring
so deeply the psychic and
spiritual side of medicine.
But in your case, your
interest in parapsychology
began when you were quite young.
>> That's true.
I was introduced to the concept
really by my father, Russ Targ,
who's a physicist who's
been doing research
in parapsychology and remote
viewing for many, many years.
>> And we've had the pleasure
of interviewing them on this
program.
>> Great.
>> In fact.
He's one of the people
who really introduced
the concept of remote
viewing to the public
and to the research community,
even to the government.
>> I think what he introduced
for me was the concept that one
can do research in an area
like this, that you can do--
you can ask questions
about things
that are not understood
at all and still get
meaningful data out of it.
>> Mm-hmm.
So your approach
really is to look
at the impact of a spiritual
lifestyle, spiritual practices,
spiritual disciplines
and techniques
from the perspective
of a researcher.
>> Mm-hmm, that's right.
Most of what I'm doing is
within a medical context.
The Complementary Medicine
Research Institute
is the research branch
of a whole complementary
alternative--
what you might call a
mind-body-spirit medicine
clinical program at the
California Pacific Medical
Center, it's called
the Institute
for Health and Healing.
And we were really set up
because all kinds of people,
as you might imagine, in
the San Francisco Bay Area
are exploring new
mind-body-spirit approaches,
and there's been almost
no information at all
to tell us whether
these things are useful,
for whom they might
be useful, and which
approaches might be the best.
And so that's why we exist.
So what that means, though,
is that our context is really
always specifically about
healing and/or personal growth.
>> And if I understand
your work correctly,
I would say there
are two components.
One would be healing is done by
people who are gifted healers,
and the other
would be people who
are ill who themselves get
involved in groups, support
groups of a spiritual nature
and visualization, meditation
practices of that
sort for self-healing.
>> Right.
My work at the
research institute
actually began probably
six or seven years ago
when the then director
of the Cancer Research
Institute, Helene Smith,
came to me and said,
what I see is that thousands of
women around the state who have
developed breast cancer are
starting to explore prayer
and meditation and yoga, and
they are coming back and saying
that they've had
spiritual epiphanies,
they're writing books about
it, and they're saying,
and then I went into
remission, and this is
why my breast cancer is cured.
And the question
she had and posed to
me is, how many of those same
women did all those things
and had no spiritual epiphany
or had a spiritual epiphany
and did not do well
with their illness?
And she-- and I really felt we
needed to study this question
and find out whether this was
going to make a difference.
So that's an example
of the kind of program
that we study where
individuals are
participating in a
personal exploration
or personal practice.
>> Well that's a
great step forward.
It used to be the case,
I think, that people
were afraid to discuss these
things with their doctors.
>> That's definitely true.
The other way you
might put it is
that their doctors were
afraid to discuss these things
with the patients, too.
That is, there have
been studies now
looking at this that say some--
you can poll people and you find
somewhere between 75% and 80%
of people in this
country say that they
would like to be speaking
with their physicians
about spiritual issues.
If you poll physicians, you
find that only 10% of physicians
have ever done that even once.
When we first started
our study, for example,
with the women
with breast cancer,
the biggest concern
at the medical center
actually came from
the nurses, who
felt that we would be
intruding on the patients
or disturbing them or
upsetting them if we asked them
about their spiritual experience
or personal spiritual beliefs
or practice.
So our first study was what
you call feasibility trial.
Were we going to scare
people away and were we
going to hurt them by opening
this question in a small group
discussion?
>> Well, I guess there has been
over the decades a separation
of the spiritual and the medical
approaches to the point where
the professional organizations
of medicine often would label
spiritual approaches as
nothing more than quackery.
>> Or what-- it's actually--
you're absolutely right,
and it's in some ways even
more insidious and built
into the profession.
And I'll actually
tell you that one
of the reasons I do this work
is because I'm a psychiatrist,
and I think as a psychiatrist,
I feel a special responsibility
around this problem
that has evolved.
And I think what
the problem is is
that nobody wants to be
told that they're crazy,
nobody wants anybody to
think that they're crazy,
and yet these the
medical designation,
the medical-- formal medical
diagnosis for anybody who
believes in what they list
in the medical textbooks
as sixth sense, extrasensory
perception, telepathy,
or people who have the
experience that there
is meaning in everything
that they see around them,
that that's listed only as
a form of psychopathology,
as schizophrenia or psychosis.
>> Well, it is
changing, I presume.
It's changing, but I think it's
changing only slowly, quite
frankly, that these
are still listed right
now in the current diagnostic
and statistical manuals
that are used by every
psychiatrist and psychologist
in the country.
And what that doesn't do
is give room for people
to have these experiences
and not necessarily be crazy.
The other thing it
does is it makes
it very difficult for
scientists or for physicians
to talk openly about even
considering the possibility
that there might be some
real external validity
to these kinds of reports.
>> Well, I'm sure you
know that there is.
You, as I recall,
did experiments--
telepathy experiments between
Russia and the United States
many years ago when
you were much younger.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> And got excellent data.
Published your results,
you've published
a number of telepathy studies.
>> That's right.
And right now there's no
place for that in science.
I mean, I had a kind of
a remarkable experience
a couple of years ago.
There was a conference that was
set up at the Harvard Medical
School jointly between
Harvard and the Institute
of Noetic Sciences, which is a
group that does a lot of work
and consciousness research.
And they invited I think some
60 or 70 medical researchers,
university researchers from
around the country who are all
doing foremost trials,
studies of distant healing
or distant healing
intentionality.
And they flew us
all out to Harvard
and we all sat around
in the usual way
presenting data and
discussing research protocols.
The only thing that was
unusual about this meeting
is that the guest
list was confidential.
That is, the researchers were
only comfortable in attending
this meeting if they could be
guaranteed that nobody would
know that they were
interested in pursuing
this type of research.
>> It has a social stigma
attached to it within
the mainstream
academic community.
>> It does.
And it seems to be--
actually, what's
really interesting to me is
it seems to be a perceived
social stigma.
That is, everybody seems to
be very worried about it.
At the same time, I and
many other researchers
now have done formal
trials on this,
we have successfully published
them in the mainstream,
and when we actually go
and present our data,
nobody has a problem with it.
People will discuss
with us, I think
as is appropriate very formally,
the protocols and the data
and ask appropriate questions.
>> Well then you, to my
way of thinking, Elizabeth,
are a seminal person.
You're right at the
turning point from one era
to another, an
era where this was
a taboo topic to an era in which
it's an acceptable, respectable
scientific topic.
You're one of the people
who helped turn the corner.
>> Well things are really
changing right now.
I think probably the
most dramatic change that
has happened,
actually, is that now
the National Institutes
of Health, which
is the prime funder for
university research,
actually has a formal category
to which you can apply
if you're interested in doing a
study, of what some would call
prayer or psychic healing.
What they call it at the NIH
is distant mental influence
on biological systems.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> But we know what that means.
>> And there have been how many
published studies in that field
now?
>> There have been probably
close to 150 published studies.
It's only recently that
those studies are showing up
in mainstream journals.
The most exciting
development in that area
was a study that was published
just this last October--
>> Elizabeth?
>> Yeah?
>> We're going to take a break.
>> OK.
>> We'll be back.
Welcome back to
"Thinking Allowed."
I'm your host, Jeffrey Mishlove.
Today I'm speaking with
Dr. Elizabeth Targ.
We're talking about research in
psychic and spiritual healing.
Dr. Targ is the Director of the
Complementary Medicine Research
Institute at the California
Pacific Medical Center
in San Francisco.
You were just mentioning
before our break, Elizabeth,
that there are 150
published studies
on the effects of distant
mental influence as a healing
technique.
150 studies, and it's still
considered a fringe area.
I'm sure that for other areas
that are very well-accepted,
like the role of aspirin in
preventing heart attacks,
far fewer studies were required.
>> That's actually the case,
and far fewer studies often are
done in those areas that are
really formerly controlled.
That's actually something
that's been written
about in the
scientific media, is
the fact that
parapsychology actually
tends to have the best
controlled studies, which
is appropriate, actually.
>> The best controlled
studies and more of them.
And it's necessary
because these studies--
this data, the idea that
the mind can exert a healing
influence at a
distance, not mediated
by any known physical
mechanism, challenges
the materialistic
paradigm of science.
>> It certainly does.
Now what I want to mention also
is how things are changing now
with these breakthroughs.
There was just a study
just recently published
in the "Archives of
Internal Medicine," which
has got to be one of the most
conservative and most carefully
reviewed medical journals in the
country, and they published a--
what is actually
replication of another study
of 1,000 patients
with heart disease
who had gone through heart
surgery who were randomly
divided into two groups.
One group was prayed for,
the other one wasn't.
They didn't even know
they were in a study,
and they still found a
significant difference.
>> None of them knew
they were in a study.
>> They didn't even know--
>> There could not have been
a placebo effect at all.
>> No chance of a-- there's
a whole other concern about
whether that's not an
appropriate thing to do.
Personally I think that
people have a right
to know whether
they're in a study.
>> But that would be, I guess,
a triple-blind condition.
>> That would be a
triple-blind condition.
>> Interesting.
>> Yeah.
>> Normally just double-blind
is considered a requirement
for research of this sort.
>> Well, you were saying how
carefully controlled these
trials have to be, and one of
the reasons they have to be
carefully controlled
is because--
you can look sort
of from the outside
and say, well because
it's controversial.
But the reason
it's controversial
is a good reason, because there
are many, many ways that people
can fool themselves.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> That is, when I first
started hearing about the idea
of psychic healing
or prayer healing,
I was really very skeptical.
I didn't think it
was going to work.
And the reason was
that as a psychiatrist,
I like to think that if somebody
who is ill or distressed
sits with a
well-intentioned person
and whom they have some
confidence, that even that will
generate a certain
amount of hope
and improved mood and
expectation for improvement.
And as I look
around and I listen
to people's anecdotal claims
about healing, what they're
usually telling me is about
how some very special person,
usually very loving
and very confident
person came and
spent time with them
and told them that they
were going to get better
and created an unusual
environment with candles
or incense, and then they
start to feel better.
And--
>> Bedside manner.
Exactly.
And that's wonderful
that bedside manner can
be so helpful, but that's
different than suggesting
that there might be
some mental or what
some people are calling an
energetic effect at a distance.
That's a really
separate question.
>> As far as I know, even
parapsychologists were very
skeptical about psychic healing
up until the 1960s when I
believe it was Bernard
Grad at McGill University,
a biologist there, first did
studies having a well-known
healer treat mice.
>> One of the things about
doing studies in healing,
one of the difficulties
is that if what you want--
if the question that
you're really interested in
is there what people call a
distant or non-local effect,
if that's what you want to know,
then what you're going to end
up studying is something
different than the way
a spiritual healer
would normally work.
And so that already
creates a difficulty.
It means that you're not doing
a completely naturalistic study.
>> Well some healers do
work at a distance, though.
>> Some do work at a distance,
but most of the time, still,
their patient knows that
they're working for them,
and a lot of times
they might say,
I'm going to be working for
you at 4 o'clock this afternoon
and I'd like you to lie
quietly and be open.
And so even that could
make a difference.
>> Yes.
>> Yeah, there's a lot of
evidence for that just from
meditation research.
So to really ask this
question, if you eliminate--
if you eliminate the
expectation, if you eliminate
the preparation, if you
eliminate the contact,
if you eliminate the warm
hands, take it all away,
there's still an effect.
You have to go to some pretty
extreme lengths sometimes
to set that up.
>> Well that's precisely what
you did in research funded
by the government.
>> That's right.
Actually, our new study is
funded by the government.
This is actually
our third study.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> Third formal trial of distant
healing for people with HIV.
And with each one we've tried
to expand it and refine it.
In the first two
studies, what we
did was work with people
as healers who were known
or at least who claimed
and were thought
to be extraordinary healers
of one type or another.
We chose healers from
all over the country
of all different
types, because we
didn't know which
healer was going
to be the best because
we didn't even know
if healing was going to work.
So we just took a
broad range and said,
well, people come to us if
you think you can do this.
And then we set them up to be
given photographs of people
with AIDS and to
spend an hour a day
sending their healing intention.
And so we followed patients who
had had this experience, then,
for six months, and we found
significant differences
between the groups.
What we're doing in this study
is we're asking the question,
who is a healer?
The first study we had
special famous people
who claim to be healers.
In the new study, we're working
still with experienced healers,
but also including mainstream
nurses who may never
have had any experience
or practice in doing
this kind of healing,
but yet who are obviously
in a profession that's all
about compassionate intention
for healing.
>> Mm-hmm.
Well, if it follows
the work that you've
done in remote
viewing, it suggests
that these skills,
although they're not
widely acknowledged, are
still widely distributed
in the population.
>> That's my guess.
And at this point, that's
what we call a hypothesis.
There are other
people who disagree,
and they may be right, too,
because there's some people who
say that there may be--
that certain people are better
natural healers, some people--
there's certain
traditional groups
that say that it's a
hereditary ability,
and there's certainly many
schools around the country that
are teaching healing, which
would suggest that somebody
ought to go from being not so
good to be better if they took
the course.
So this is the first step.
A study we'd like
to do in the future,
actually, would be to take
novices, people who've never
tried to do healing, look
at their healing ability
if they have any, and then put
them through a training course
and see if it
makes a difference.
>> Now you said there was
a difference in your study
between the patients who
received the distant mental
influence, the positive healing
intentions of another person.
Could you describe
that difference?
How noticeable was it?
>> The difference in the
study was actually very,
very strong and very dramatic.
We looked-- actually, what I'd
like to do is actually tell you
what all of the results were
because one of the concerns
people often have
about healing studies
is maybe only the significant
results were reported,
so I'm going to tell you
everything we looked at.
What we looked at was the
number of AIDS-defining diseases
that the patient developed
over the study period.
We looked at the severity
of those illnesses,
we looked at the number
of doctor visits,
the number of hospital visits,
the length of hospitalizations,
psychological changes,
functional changes, CD4 count,
and survival.
And what we found is that people
who were in the healing group,
even though they didn't
know they were receiving
the healing-- and we
the researchers also
didn't know that they were
receiving the healing,
they had-- the
people who received
the healing had six
times fewer new illnesses
than the people who did not.
>> Six times?
>> That's right.
That's in a population
of 40 patients.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> In addition, the illnesses
that they developed were
significantly less
severe, because with AIDS,
obviously there's a range of
severity we were only looking
at the most severe illnesses
in this categorization.
And still, among the
most severe illnesses,
the people who didn't
get the treatment
were the ones who got
the severe illnesses.
>> It sounds as if-- what you're
telling me is that the psychic
healing effect was as strong
as any known chemical or drug
treatment for AIDS.
>> I don't know that
I could say that,
I'd have to look at
the data to compare.
I think we really don't
know under which conditions
it's going to help somebody.
The new treatments
for AIDS, what
they call the heart therapies,
the antiretroviral medications
and protease inhibitors
have completely
changed the face of AIDS.
And so I think,
actually, it brings up
a really important point,
that people-- some people have
been concerned
about our research,
that maybe we would be
encouraging people not to take
their conventional medicine.
What we do in our
studies is we call it
an adjunctive treatment.
So what we have recommended
to all of our patients
is that they continue taking
their regular treatments
and then we see
what this might add.
>> We obviously have a
lot to learn about it.
And as the drugs
are always changing,
and the research
on psychic healing
is becoming more
sophisticated, it
will be interesting to see
how they can work together.
Well, Dr. Elizabeth Targ, this
has been a very enlightening
experience, I'm so thrilled
that you're doing this work
and finding support from
the medical establishment
and from the government.
Elizabeth, thanks so
much for being with me.
>> Thank you very much.
>> And thank you
for being with us,
and check your program listing
for part 2 of this two-part
series with Dr. Elizabeth
Targ on psychic and spiritual
healing.
[MUSIC PLAYING]